.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Manpage for kmod-profiler.
.TH KMOD\-PROFILER 8 "May 11, 2026" "kmod-profiler 1.0.0" "System Administration"

.SH NAME
kmod\-profiler \- kernel module allowlist via runtime observation

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kmod\-profiler sample
.br
.B kmod\-profiler status
.br
.B kmod\-profiler generate
.RI [ kernel\-version ]
.br
.B kmod\-profiler apply
.RI [ file ]
.br
.B kmod\-profiler kernel\-changed
.I kernel\-version
.br
.B kmod\-profiler rescan
.br
.B kmod\-profiler diff
.I kver1 kver2
.br
.B kmod\-profiler --version

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kmod\-profiler
observes which kernel modules a system loads over time, then generates a
.BR modprobe.d (5)
blacklist for every module that exists on disk but was never observed loaded.
This reduces the kernel's autoload attack surface against local privilege
escalation bugs in subsystems the system never legitimately uses.
.PP
The tool maintains
.I per\-kernel
observation and snapshot data, so kernel updates that add, remove, or rename
modules don't silently desynchronize the blacklist from reality. Modules newly
introduced by a kernel update enter a
.I grace window
(7 days by default) during which they will not be blacklisted, giving normal
operation a chance to demonstrate whether they're needed before they are
suppressed.
.PP
Three independent triggers feed observation: a periodic
.BR systemd.timer (5)
unit running
.B sample
every minute; kernel package install hooks calling
.B kernel\-changed
when a new kernel is installed; and a
.BR systemd.path (5)
unit watching
.I /lib/modules
that calls
.B rescan
to catch DKMS rebuilds and out\-of\-tree driver drops.
.PP
This is hardening, not an integrity boundary. A privileged attacker can edit
.I /etc/modprobe.d/
or rebuild the initramfs. For an integrity boundary, pair with kernel module
signing
.RB ( CONFIG_MODULE_SIG_FORCE )
and lockdown mode. See
.I /usr/share/doc/kmod\-profiler/kmod\-profiler.md
for the complete design discussion, threat model, and operational guidance.

.SH COMMANDS

.TP
.B sample
Read currently loaded modules from
.I /proc/modules
and merge them into the per\-kernel observation set
.RI ( observed/<kver> )
and the cross\-kernel union
.RI ( all\-observed ).
Idempotent and safe to call repeatedly. Typically invoked by
.BR kmod\-profiler.timer (5).

.TP
.BR generate " [" \fIkernel\-version\fR "]"
Compute and write the candidate blacklist for
.I kernel\-version
(default: the running kernel) to
.IR /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/generated\-blacklist.conf .
The blacklist contains every module that
.RS
.IP \(bu 3
is available in
.IR /lib/modules/<kver>/ ,
.IP \(bu 3
has never been observed loaded under any kernel, and
.IP \(bu 3
is past its grace window.
.RE
.IP
For each blacklisted module, both a
.B blacklist
directive and an
.B install
.I module
.B /bin/false
directive are emitted. The latter is required to defeat alias\-driven autoloads
(e.g.
.IR xfrm\-type\-50 \(rq esp4 ,
.IR net\-pf\-45 \(rq rxrpc ).
This command does not modify
.IR /etc/modprobe.d/ ;
review the generated file before applying.

.TP
.BR apply " [" \fIfile\fR "]"
Copy
.I file
(default:
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/generated\-blacklist.conf )
to
.IR /etc/modprobe.d/zz\-kmod\-profiler.conf .
Requires root. After applying, the initramfs must be rebuilt for the
blacklist to take effect at early boot:
.B update\-initramfs \-u
on Debian/Ubuntu,
.B dracut \-f
on Fedora/RHEL,
.B mkinitcpio \-P
on Arch.

.TP
.BI kernel\-changed " kernel\-version"
Hook entry point invoked by package managers when a kernel is installed.
Snapshots the new kernel's available modules, marks any modules new to the
system with the current grace timestamp, regenerates the blacklist, and
refreshes
.I /etc/modprobe.d/zz\-kmod\-profiler.conf
if it already exists. Designed to run before the initramfs is regenerated by
the kernel package's other hooks. Does not require root, but typically runs
in a privileged context as part of package installation.

.TP
.B rescan
Walk
.I /lib/modules
and process any kernel directories without snapshots, plus detect drift
in existing snapshots (DKMS rebuilds, manual
.I .ko
drops). Equivalent to calling
.B kernel\-changed
on every drifted kernel. Typically invoked by
.BR kmod\-profiler\-rescan.path (5).

.TP
.B status
Display the running kernel version, counts of available and observed modules,
the size of the grace window, the inventory of kernel snapshots on file, and
recent log entries. Read\-only.

.TP
.BI diff " kver1 kver2"
Show the difference between two kernel snapshots: which modules appeared in
.I kver2
that weren't in
.IR kver1 ,
and which were removed. Useful for understanding what changed in a kernel
upgrade, particularly when investigating why a previously-working module is
suddenly being blacklisted.

.TP
.B --version
Print the version and exit.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B kmod\-profiler
honors the following environment variables. Defaults match a normal Linux
system; overriding them is useful for testing, forensic analysis of disk
images, or analyzing module trees from other machines.

.TP
.B KMOD_PROFILER_STATE
State directory. Default:
.IR /var/lib/kmod\-profiler .

.TP
.B KMOD_PROC_MODULES
Path to the loaded\-modules table. Default:
.IR /proc/modules .

.TP
.B KMOD_LIB_MODULES
Root of per\-kernel module trees. Default:
.IR /lib/modules .

.TP
.B KMOD_LIVE_BLACKLIST
Path written by the
.B apply
subcommand. Default:
.IR /etc/modprobe.d/zz\-kmod\-profiler.conf .

.TP
.B KMOD_KERNEL_VERSION
Override running\-kernel detection. Default: output of
.BR uname (1)
.BR \-r .

.TP
.B KMOD_GRACE_SECONDS
Grace window in seconds for newly-appeared modules. Default:
.B 604800
(7 days). Common alternatives:
.B 2592000
(30 days, suitable for laptops with sporadic device usage),
.B 1209600
(14 days, suitable for typical desktops),
.B 172800
(2 days, suitable for tightly\-scoped servers).

.SH FILES

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/observed/<kver>
Per\-kernel set of modules observed loaded.

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/snapshots/<kver>
Per\-kernel set of modules available on disk.

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/all\-observed
Union of observed sets across every kernel ever profiled.

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/grace
Tab\-separated
.IR module\-name "\\t" first\-seen\-epoch
records.

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/generated\-blacklist.conf
Most recent
.B generate
output.

.TP
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/profile.log
Human\-readable operation log.

.TP
.I /etc/modprobe.d/zz\-kmod\-profiler.conf
Live blacklist file.

.TP
.I /etc/kernel/postinst.d/60\-kmod\-profiler
Debian/Ubuntu kernel package hook.

.TP
.I /etc/kernel/install.d/40\-kmod\-profiler.install
.BR kernel\-install (8)
hook for Fedora, RHEL, Arch, and other systemd-based distros.

.SH EXAMPLES

After installing the package, profiling begins automatically via
.BR kmod\-profiler.timer (5).
After 1\(en4 weeks of normal use, generate and review the candidate blacklist:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ sudo kmod\-profiler status
$ sudo kmod\-profiler generate
$ less /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/generated\-blacklist.conf
.fi
.RE

.PP
Apply the reviewed blacklist and rebuild the initramfs:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ sudo kmod\-profiler apply
$ sudo update\-initramfs \-u    # Debian/Ubuntu
$ sudo dracut \-f               # Fedora/RHEL
$ sudo mkinitcpio \-P           # Arch
$ sudo reboot
.fi
.RE

.PP
Investigate why a module is being blacklisted:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ grep \-l "^module_name$" /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/observed/*
$ kmod\-profiler diff 6.10.0 6.12.0
.fi
.RE

.PP
Override the grace period to 30 days for a laptop with sporadic device use:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ sudo systemctl edit kmod\-profiler.service
[Service]
Environment=KMOD_GRACE_SECONDS=2592000
.fi
.RE

.PP
Analyze a module tree from another machine (e.g. a mounted disk image):
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ KMOD_PROFILER_STATE=/tmp/forensic\-state \\
  KMOD_LIB_MODULES=/mnt/image/lib/modules \\
  KMOD_KERNEL_VERSION=6.10.0\-image \\
  kmod\-profiler generate
.fi
.RE

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit status is 0 on success and non-zero on error. Specific failure modes:
.TP
.B 1
General error (e.g. no snapshot for the requested kernel,
.B apply
without the file, missing required argument).
.TP
.B 2
Hook script invoked without a kernel version argument.
.PP
Operations are logged to
.I /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/profile.log
with ISO\-8601 timestamps. Inspect the log for diagnostic output:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ tail \-f /var/lib/kmod\-profiler/profile.log
.fi
.RE

.SH SECURITY
.B kmod\-profiler
reduces the autoload attack surface of the kernel against unprivileged
exploits. It does
.B not
prevent a privileged (UID 0) attacker from loading modules; the blacklist is
advisory enforcement at the
.BR modprobe (8)
layer, not a kernel\-enforced integrity boundary.
.PP
For an actual integrity boundary, combine this tool with:
.IP \(bu 3
.B Kernel module signing
.RB ( CONFIG_MODULE_SIG_FORCE=y )
to require valid signatures on all loaded modules.
.IP \(bu 3
.B Kernel lockdown mode
.RB ( "lockdown=integrity" " or " "lockdown=confidentiality" )
to prevent runtime tampering even by root.
.IP \(bu 3
.B Unprivileged user namespace restrictions
.RI ( kernel.unprivileged_userns_clone=0
or equivalent) to defeat exploits that depend on namespace creation as a
prerequisite.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR modprobe (8),
.BR modprobe.d (5),
.BR depmod (8),
.BR lsmod (8),
.BR kernel\-install (8),
.BR systemd.timer (5),
.BR systemd.path (5),
.BR initramfs\-tools (7),
.BR dracut (8),
.BR mkinitcpio (8),
.BR uname (1)
.PP
Full design reference, threat model, and operational guide:
.IR /usr/share/doc/kmod\-profiler/kmod\-profiler.md .

.SH AUTHORS
The kmod\-profiler contributors.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 kmod\-profiler contributors.
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
